[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Why
do we do the things
that we know will hurt us?
Is it a moment of forgetting
who we are or numbing the pain
or maybe succumbing to
the disease of addiction?
How do we expose these
shadows and shed some light
into the deepest
parts of ourselves?
Hi, I'm Lisa Garr, and joining
me is Chris Grosso who just
finished his third book
on addiction and recovery
called "Dead Set on Living."
And along with 20 million
American adults and children,
Chris has struggled
with substance abuse
and is here to talk
about how he overcame
his struggle many times over.
Welcome.
>>CHRIS GROSSO: Thank
you for having me, Lisa.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It's great to have
you here again.
>>GROSSO: Yes.
>>LISA: So catch us up a
little bit since the last time
that we spoke.
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
>>LISA: And you have
been through a couple
of different challenges.
>>GROSSO: I have.
I've been through some heavy
times, some great times.
It's life, the ups and downs.
But yeah, shortly after we had
met in Phoenix a few years back
at the Celebrate
Your Life Conference,
I was, last you knew, living
in Canada and was married.
And it wasn't that
long after that that--
I don't remember
exactly how long,
but I ended up having a relapse.
And it was a pretty
rough relapse.
It actually almost took my life.
It was only 24 hours.
It started with
Percocets that I had been
prescribed for a root canal.
And the addiction talks
to us in our own voice,
and it seems very
rational, though it
is completely irrational.
>>LISA: Were there other things
going on in your life that--
>>GROSSO: Sure.
Yeah.
I mean, leading up to
that, luckily the divorce--
and I'm coming
ahead a little bit,
but when my wife
and I got divorced,
it was pretty amicable.
It was not an ugly divorce.
We were very respectful
of one another.
But prior to that, things had
not been going well for us,
and I was definitely
struggling with that.
I was wearing myself very thin
with speaking engagements,
with traveling, with
writing working on.
I think only-- yeah.
"Everything Mind" had just
come out, my second book.
So I'd been doing a lot
of work around that.
And I was not taking
proper care of myself.
I was not doing enough for
my own personal recovery.
I struggle, still to this
day, but I've got much better
with boundaries, with saying
no to engagements or people.
Hey, I'm going through
this-- complete strangers.
Can you help me?
And it's so hard for
me to not even say no,
but, I mean, yeah, I guess
essentially say no in a way.
Like, I just--
I spread myself too thin.
>>LISA: Boundaries is a really--
>>GROSSO: Big one.
>>LISA: --key issue,
especially for anyone--
and I, in a way,
think that, in a way,
we're all addicted to something.
>>GROSSO: For sure.
>>LISA: If it's not alcohol
or drugs, it's shopping.
It could be relationships.
It could be work.
It could be exercise.
There's something.
>>GROSSO: Yes.
>>LISA: In your mind,
what is an addiction?
>>GROSSO: So the best
description I've ever heard
of it, it actually comes from a
world-renowned addiction expert
named Gabor Maté--
wonderful, brilliant man.
And it's not verbatim, but he
said something to the effect
of addiction is any behavior--
and these are the first words
that are verbatim because they
just struck such a cord with
me--
any behavior, substance
related or not--
so right there, he
kind of flips it
because most people
think of addiction
and they think of a
heroin addict strung out
under a bridge or an
alcoholic drunk in a gutter.
And for sure, that
has happened in life.
But that is not
the bigger picture.
So he goes on to say,
any behavior, substance
related or not, that has
negative consequences
in our life, but we continue to
do despite said consequences.
>>LISA: So that day, that
Percocet prescription
had a grip on you.
>>GROSSO: Once I put it in
my body, it did, absolutely.
And it landed me
essentially in the hospital
when I landed in Florida.
>>LISA: Did you experience
shame at that moment?
>>GROSSO: Oh, absolutely.
That is a huge part for me.
And I know I'm not very unique,
in that sense, because that's
a big part of anyone
that struggles
with addiction is the shame
and the guilt and the remorse.
And the dangerous
thing about that
is that then becomes
more fuel to continue
with your addiction.
>>LISA: That was what
I was going to ask you.
So the shame doesn't stop you.
It is unsolvable and you
just keep numbing, right?
>>GROSSO: Yeah,
exactly-- keep numbing.
But I also knew that I did not
want to go back down that road.
So when I got back to the
airport, I did call my parents.
I let them know right
away what was going on.
I called my old
college professor who
has become very close to me.
When I was in school, I was
in school for substance abuse
counseling.
And even though this
was many years ago
that I was in school for that,
she and I, my old professor
from college, became
very close, and she's
like a second mom to me.
So I called her to let
her know, and I called--
besides 12 steps,
I also do what's
called Refuge Recovery, which
is a Buddhist approach to the 12
steps, in a way, that Noah
Levine, the author of "Dharma
Punx," started,
great fellowship.
And I should say, one need
not be Buddhist to do it.
It's a very helpful fellowship.
But I mention that because
I have the equivalent
of a sponsor in the 12 steps.
It's called a mentor
in Refuge Recovery.
And so I called
my mentor and let
him know what had happened
because I know that once you
end up in a relapse and
you actually pick up,
I can't stop myself
at that point.
It's off to the races.
So I needed to tell him
myself immediately and let
them know that when
I got home I wanted
to get into treatment and stop.
>>LISA: And then when
you got to the airport,
were your parents
there and they--
>>GROSSO: It's blurry, but I
remember my parents waiting
for me in baggage claim.
And they knew I'd been
drinking because I
told them and they
could smell it, see it.
You know, it's very obvious.
And by the time we got
back to their house, which
was about 40 minutes
or so from the airport,
I was completely out of it.
And they had seen me,
unfortunately, like that,
so talk about shame and guilt.
I have these memories of that.
>>LISA: Yeah.
They're still there for you.
>>GROSSO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: So why do
you think people
who are in recovery relapse?
>>GROSSO: A wonderful
question-- and it's
kind of the million dollar
question, so to speak.
You ask experts
and you'll probably
find some answers
that interject,
but you're going to
get different answers
from different perspectives.
And I can only really
speak to my own experience
and the experience of those
I have worked with myself.
And so what I think a big
part of it is the relapse,
actually, technically
happens before you pick up
the substance.
It's in our behaviors and our
actions leading up to that.
Usually addiction experts
will say once you pick up,
that's when the relapse
technically kind of stops
because then you're in go mode.
So it's the actions and
behaviors leading up to that.
So in my case, it's
pulling back from--
I do attend meetings.
That's a part of my well-being.
I exercise.
I meditate.
I do a lot of various things.
I take a very integral
approach to recovery.
But when I start pulling
back from those things
and not giving myself enough
time for my own well-being
and, going back to what
I was saying earlier,
spreading myself too thin.
And it can be tricky for
me because my line of work
is enmeshed in not just
substance abuse, but healing,
well-being in general.
>>LISA: Speaking.
>>GROSSO: Yeah, speaking
about these very things.
>>LISA: Counseling.
>>GROSSO: Right, exactly.
So going back to what I said
earlier again, that addiction,
it talks to us in our own voice.
So I'll tell myself,
it's OK if you're
missing x amount of
meetings because you're
doing work in the field,
you're engaging with people.
>>LISA: We justify it.
Yes.
>>GROSSO: I totally justify it.
>>LISA: In everything.
>>GROSSO: Yes.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GROSSO: So that seems to
be the biggest part, the one
common denominator.
Of course, there will
be obvious triggers.
Like, a death of a loved
one can send someone
into an addiction or a
relapse, a loss of a job,
a death in a family.
And it doesn't even
have to be big things.
It can be a little things.
>>LISA: And we're going
to talk about solutions
and how, specifically, to handle
every one of those issues.
But first I want to ask
you, you just mentioned,
is alcoholism a disease?
And this is controversial.
Some say yes, and some say no.
>>GROSSO: I try to place
Switzerland on this one
because--
>>LISA: What do you feel?
>>GROSSO: So I understand
the disease model of it.
A lot of people will reference
the AMA, American Medical
Association, because
they have their three
criteria for something
to be categorized
as that, which is it's
chronic, it's progressive,
and it's fatal.
And addiction absolutely
falls and has those three.
I don't get so
personally caught up
in the semantics of
the wording of it
because, at the end of the
day, I'm more concerned
with whatever you call it,
it is capable of taking
your life, my life, if we
are caught in that behavior.
>>LISA: Are you afraid of that?
Are you afraid of
death, of dying to this?
>>GROSSO: Yes.
I don't know that I'm
necessarily afraid of dying,
but of dying to
this, absolutely.
That would be--
>>LISA: What's the difference?
>>GROSSO: To me, if I
died from addiction rather
than natural death
or in an accident
or whatever, it's just
tragic to me any time
a life is lost to addiction.
I do a lot of work
with people that I've--
and I know a lot
of people that have
died to addiction or depression,
taking their own lives.
That, to me, is so tragic
when it's unnecessary.
And the thing that's
alarming to me
and disheartening is that,
at least in Connecticut,
and I think this is a pretty
universal thing in our country,
funding for programs for those
who struggle with addiction
are constantly being cut.
>>LISA: Are they?
>>GROSSO: Jobs are being lost.
And so we're cutting
all of these resources
for people that need help, and
you look at the jail population
and it's overflowing with
people that are there for drug
and alcohol-related offenses.
So not only are we
doing a disservice
to the well-being of people, but
now we have this prison issue.
And then, I don't
want to sidetrack,
but that is also a big
controversial thing
because there's
for-profit prisons
and let's get more people in
there because it's more money.
>>LISA: Yes.
It's a big issue.
But it's finally
in our awareness.
>>GROSSO: It is.
>>LISA: There's actually
some reforms reformed prisons
in California that I'm very
excited about that actually
have treatment programs
and they've been converted,
which is fine.
It's a for-profit model still,
but it's helping people.
>>GROSSO: It is.
>>LISA: And we're going to
get into those signs, also,
and what those solutions are.
But in the absence of
this funding and the cuts
and so forth, do you
think that's what
has caused this opioid epidemic
that we hear about so much?
What's the reason for that?
>>GROSSO: Yeah, I wouldn't
say that's what caused it,
but that is absolutely
a contributing factor.
There is no doubt
about it because there
are a lot of people in need
that aren't getting this help.
>>LISA: So in the
treatment centers,
you get help and hydration and--
>>GROSSO: Oh yeah, absolutely.
And that's why I tell people,
if you are, especially
for your first time, thinking
about going into this,
detox is something that can
be very beneficial for you.
Not everyone needs it.
I've met people that have
found their way through 12
steps or meditation and yoga,
and they weren't at the point
physically where their body
was so heavily dependent
on the substance that they
needed medical supervision
in their detox experience.
For me, my two major
drugs of choice--
I mean, I'm the kind
of person who'll
take whatever just to get
me out of myself, but my two
major ones are alcohol and
benzodiazepines, things
like Xanax or Klonopin, Ativan.
And those are the
only two things
you can actually die
from while withdrawing
because they can lead
to severe seizures
and ultimately kill you.
Things like heroin or opioids,
you'll feel like you're dying,
but you can't actually
die from them.
However, when you go in
and get medical attention,
they can give you medication
that will help you and help
the actual physical experience.
It's still not going
to be pleasant,
but it can certainly help,
and that gives people a better
chance at really
getting through it
and then going into a program.
>>LISA: So you do
need assistance
when you're going through
something like that
from a treatment center.
And I like how you say it is
not something to be afraid of.
It's not pretty, but it's
something that you really
need to look into.
>>GROSSO: Absolutely, because
at the end of the day,
really when you're stuck
in that situation of being
in full-blown addiction,
you have two options,
use until you end up in a jail
cell, in an emergency room,
or dead--
really, that's kind of
your three options--
or make the decision, which
I'm not saying is easy,
but make that decision
that I don't want to end up
in those places, I don't have
to end up in those places,
I can get help, I
need to get help.
>>LISA: Now, you work with a
lot of the younger generation.
And I would love to
hear your perspective
on what systemically is going
on with the youth, Gen X, Z, Y,
whatever you want to call
it, to what's missing and why
the opioid availability.
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
So I know opioids
are very popular.
And I mean, it is an
epidemic right now,
especially with young people.
>>LISA: Right.
Why?
>>GROSSO: Well, going
back to big pharma,
they are prescribed so
freely and so easily
and I'm not saying necessarily
to these younger individuals,
but it's very easy to go into
your parent's medicine cabinet,
or there are even places you can
order them online and have them
shipped from other countries.
You can go to the streets and
buy them so easily and not just
in cities.
I mean, it's getting, I believe,
a lot more attention now
because it has hit the suburbs.
And it's not that they
haven't been there.
But it's becoming much more
of an issue in suburbs.
And I mean, it's been rampant in
inner cities for years and not
just opioids, I mean,
anything from alcohol
to crack and cocaine.
And so I should also note that
it's not just opioids that are
being abused in suburbs--
alcohol, of course, and things
like crack, cocaine, PCP.
I mean, it's all being
abused, for sure,
but opioids are the big one.
And they're also big because
they are such an easy killer.
Opioids often lead to
heroin in many, many cases
because they get
expensive over time.
And as your addiction
grows, you need more
to get that high that
you were getting before.
And it just wears your bank
account down so quickly
or, if you're younger,
your allowance, whatever
the case may be.
And you're going from paying,
I mean, $100, $200 a day
to, oh, I can just get
these bundles of heroin,
which are a fraction of the
cost, yet are much more lethal.
You get a bad bag or
you shoot too much
and your life is over like that.
That's the tragic thing.
When I've been in
treatment programs,
I've heard it on a
couple of occasions,
the clinicians-- and this
is such a good point.
They ask that
people look around,
and it's always an age range,
anywhere from teenagers
to people in their 70s.
And they'll ask, who's
here for opioids?
And typically, it's
the younger people.
And then they say,
who's here for alcohol?
And it's typically older people.
And the point they're
making is you rarely see
a person that's older
in treatment for opioids
because it is a very quick
killer, whereas alcohol
is a much slower
progressive death.
It wears on your body.
It wears on every organ
you have over time,
unless you drink
and drive and get
into an accident where
that could take your life
that quick.
>>LISA: So you're saying
that they're, first of all,
gateways, they're
gateway drugs into--
what do you feel about the
legalization of marijuana,
speaking of gateway drugs?
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
So-- and this is another
controversial one,
especially for
someone in recovery.
I don't consider
marijuana a drug.
I think it is a plant medicine
when used in the right context.
That said, I'm not here
saying go smoke pot,
especially if you're
in recovery, because I
have seen it take people out.
And while that might not
be their drug of choice,
they will engage in
marijuana for a while,
and then it's not hitting
their pleasure center
in their brain the same
way their drug of choice
is, so it's often
just a matter of time
before they go back
to get that high,
whether it is an opiate or
alcohol or whatever the case.
But I've also seen it have
positive effects on people.
And in some cases,
people with chronic pain,
they've tried everything
and it doesn't work,
but marijuana really does
help, or cancer patients
that have severe nausea issues.
It really helps.
And that leads into things
like ayahuasca, which I also
don't have an issue
with when done
in the right context, under
the right supervision,
with the right
settings and intention.
I've personally
never done ayahuasca,
so I can't say
anything pro or con,
but I can say I have seen it
work wonders in some people's
lives who've struggled
with depression,
same with marijuana, but
I've also seen it lead people
down a darker path too.
>>LISA: But as an
addictive personality,
you don't do it personally.
>>GROSSO: I don't--
no, I don't do either.
The thing with ayahuasca,
it's not addictive whatsoever,
or things like mushrooms
or psychedelics.
So I know we're kind of
straying from marijuana.
But I have seen
people in treatment
strictly for marijuana.
It might not have the
same physical effect when
it comes to the
addictive nature,
but mentally it absolutely
can be just as addicting
for people, and it can lead
to actual mental issues.
I know someone from
the last treatment
program I went in who
would hear voices,
and otherwise he's a very
rational, sane, humorous
person.
But when he smokes to
the extent that he does--
and he was prescribed it
for chronic pain to start,
but he began abusing it--
he had severe mental
reactions to it.
>>LISA: So let's talk
about early warning signs
that we can tell our
loved ones or people
that we're close to
are starting to head
towards that place of addiction.
What do we look for?
What do we say?
>>GROSSO: Sure.
So-- I mean, the four
stages of addiction
are experimentation,
regular use, abuse, and then
you cross the line from
abuse to addiction.
And once you cross that line
from abuse to addiction,
one in a million can go
back to safely using.
So it's not necessarily
a throw all the red flags
or it's a big warning sign
that my son or daughter
has smoked pot or tried pot.
>>LISA: Experimentation.
>>GROSSO:
Experimentation-- right.
When it starts to head into
the regular use and then abuse,
that's where there's
really cause for alarm
because they're starting
to rely on something
in that regular
use or abuse phase
to take them out of
what they're feeling.
Instead of feeling
their feelings
and sitting with what
they're dealing with,
they're leaning on something
outside of themselves
to help them.
And that's not to
say that it may not
be prescribed in some
capacity to someone
or they might not be prescribed
something else to help with,
whether it's depression,
anxiety, or so on.
So ultimately, they may need
to take something outside
of themselves, even
if temporarily,
to help balance their
physiology or their chemistry
in their bodies.
But so--
>>LISA: Is regular use
once a day, every weekend,
or what is regular?
>>GROSSO: Different for--
>>LISA: Different-- OK.
>>GROSSO: --different people.
But yeah, I would say if it's
more than two or three times
a week, you're not really
experimenting anymore.
Experimenting is experimenting.
>>LISA: What about an
age, like an age range?
Do you see 15-year-olds
that you would stop
and say, don't start?
>>GROSSO: Especially,
yes, if they have history
in their family of addiction
because they are more
genetically prone to--
>>LISA: You think so?
>>GROSSO: Oh yeah.
I mean, it's been shown.
However, I'm also fascinated
with what's called epigenetics.
And essentially that saying--
say someone has the capacity
to grow 6 feet tall.
If they're not getting the
proper nutrition, drinking
milk, or whatever
the case may be
to give their body the nutrients
it needs to reach 6 feet tall,
then they're not going to.
So even though they have the
predisposition to be that tall
doesn't mean they're
going to get that tall,
and the same with addiction.
Just because the genetic
predisposition is
there doesn't mean that it's
going to necessarily happen.
But it does raise your chances.
>>LISA: So when you see someone
going down that pattern,
what can you do to
help support them?
What's the first
thing you can do?
>>GROSSO: So the first thing
is really, do they want help?
So people can get very defensive
about that because maybe they
don't think they have a problem,
and perhaps they don't yet.
So the approach I take,
because, as you said,
I do work with a lot of
people that are younger--
so when I do these workshops
with younger people,
I'm very real with them,
and I share my experience
in a very transparent
way, and I let
them know, look, I'm not
sharing any of this with you
as a scare tactic.
I went through the DARE program
when I was in high school,
and to be honest, it was a joke.
It was people trying
to scare you into it,
and that doesn't work,
at least for most people.
It didn't work for me.
So what I try to do is
share very honestly, look,
you're at such a young age.
I work with a lot
of anywhere from 14
to 20-year-olds,
male and females.
And if you're in treatment
at such a young age,
then there is a
serious risk for you
to potentially experience
some of the really dark places
that I have gone to.
And so again, I don't share
them as a scare tactic.
I say, look, here is what
I've been through in my life.
I am very lucky to be alive.
The same can't be said for
so many people that I know.
And a lot of them
aren't much older
than the age of the
people I work with.
I've known a lot of
people in their 20s
who have died to overdoses
or drunk driving accidents.
>>LISA: We see it all the time.
>>GROSSO: All the time.
>>LISA: So what tools
do you give them?
>>GROSSO: So it kind of depends.
When I go into these
groups or any workshops
I do, I always start out by
asking people their name,
where they're from, and just
a little bit about themselves,
and that helps me
gauge the room.
I don't try to go
in with a set these
are the exact practices
I'm going to do,
because if I do
that, then I have
more of a concrete
approach rather than fluid.
>>LISA: You'll lose some people.
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
So I'd rather kind of
gauge the room first.
And so that way, I can meet
the people where they're at.
And of course, if I'm
in a room with anywhere
from a dozen to 100 people,
we're all in different places.
But still, it's easy to
find a middle ground.
One of the most basic is
just mindfulness of breath.
And I know that's very popular,
but it's popular for a reason.
It works.
It really-- it
helps bring us back.
>>LISA: What about
support groups?
>>GROSSO: For sure.
And that's the other
key is getting help,
not going it alone, huge, which
was very, very difficult for me
and still can be because
I'm actually introverted,
which I look at the line of
work I'm in, writing books,
public speaking--
I can turn it on and go speak
in front of 1,000, 2,000 people,
but when I'm not working,
I need to retreat.
I need my solitude.
>>LISA: Most
introverts can do that.
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
So I'm grateful for that.
But it is hard for me,
when I'm struggling,
to pick up the phone and reach
out to someone and be honest
and like, hey, this is
what's going on today,
calling my sponsor,
talking to my girlfriend,
telling my parents, I'm
having a hard day today.
I've gotten much better at it.
But that is so huge, not going
it alone and actually talking,
just the act of talking
to someone you can trust,
whether professional or not.
And I do definitely
encourage professional help,
whether that's a therapist or a
program or treatment, whatever.
It's different for all of us.
We all need different things.
But just the act of getting out
verbally what is inside of you,
or if you can't muster up
the strength to do that,
start writing.
But write honestly, and
don't write for anyone else
to see it.
Write for yourself.
But write without any pretense.
Just get it all out on page.
No one's going to see it.
Just write it, write it, write
it, just to get it out of you.
It's a very honest purging,
of sorts, when you do that.
It's not a cure all,
but it's a start.
>>LISA: And are these some
of your daily practices?
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
I mean, I don't write every day.
I actually--
>>LISA: You have a
lot of books, though.
>>GROSSO: I know.
I haven't written
since-- like, it's
been eight months, actually,
since I've written anything.
Since I finished that book,
I've been drained on writing.
But I do.
I talk every day to whether it's
my sponsor or my girlfriend.
I'm so blessed to have an
incredible girlfriend--
>>LISA: Network.
>>GROSSO: --in my
life who I can just--
we have fun and we're big kids.
But if she's having a hard
day, if I'm having a hard day,
we have these very just
honest conversations
with each other where we can
hold space for one another.
And it's not that I have
answers for her, necessarily,
or she has them for me.
But again, it's just the
act of talking and knowing
that someone else is
holding this loving space,
bearing a loving witness to
you in your moment of pain.
>>LISA: Now--
>>GROSSO: It's wonderful.
>>LISA: One of the
things we were just
talking about a
little bit earlier
is about this dopamine
receptor in the brain
and how it just
loves that spike,
and the brain looks for
things that give us newness
or that feeling of a reward.
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
>>LISA: What do you do
to replace that need?
All brains need it.
>>GROSSO: They certainly do.
So I love this question.
There are obviously healthier
addictions than non-healthy.
So for example, in
my own life, I've
taken up exercising and running.
I love running,
hated it at first.
Now if I go more than a couple
days, I feel off centered.
So I love running.
I love exercising with weights.
I love-- I mean, I've
always loved skateboarding.
But that's a healthy
release of dopamines.
Meditation can
certainly be that.
Prayer can certainly
be that, hiking--
>>LISA: Tattooing.
>>GROSSO: Tattoo-- certainly.
Oh yeah.
No, really, it's part of my
own healing journey, for sure.
And again, we all
have our own things.
>>LISA: What are these?
>>GROSSO: Oh, I
mean, you're going
to have to have me back
on for a whole other show.
>>LISA: OK.
There's a whole
story here, right?
>>GROSSO: It is.
What I can tell you--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GROSSO: I mean, I
have a Kali right here.
She's from the Hindu
tradition, a very dear deity
to me, just kind of a fierce.
That's why I got her on my knee.
She's very fierce, but
a real incredible--
>>LISA: You also
have "hope" here.
Show this to the camera.
>>GROSSO: Yeah, yeah.
That was one of the first
tattoos I got, actually,
when I got out of treatment--
"love and kindness"
because that's a
very big practice I
use and a great reminder, "love
more" on the inside of my hands
because I look there a lot.
>>LISA: Oh wow.
>>GROSSO: Just remind
myself love more,
love myself more,
love others more.
>>LISA: "IMA"?
>>GROSSO: In my heart forever.
>>LISA: Oh nice.
>>GROSSO: "Bookworm"--
because I'm a big reader.
So yeah.
>>LISA: You got a
whole thing going on.
>>GROSSO: Yeah, a whole thing.
I can tell you this--
>>LISA: Then this is the lotus.
>>GROSSO: I just got
this, like, a week ago.
It's a rose.
And these I just got because
I like the aesthetic of them
and because my neck's
about the only place I
have left that's not tattooed,
that and the back of my legs.
But yeah, I'm not doing the
top of my head or my face.
So this was my last one.
>>LISA: That's great.
But this is somewhere where you
use your creative expression.
>>GROSSO: It absolutely is.
But as you can see, it
became very addictive for me.
And I talked to a lot
of people with tattoos
who have no
substance-related issues,
but nine times out of
10, the first thing
they say, even if they don't
know I'm in recovery, is it's
so addicting, right?
And I'm like, duh, yeah.
But the one thing I did want
to say to that, though, is also
to be careful with the healthier
addictions or dopamine releases
because I have caught myself
very much using practices
like meditation or running
as a means of aversion,
just like I would
use substances.
I would sit on my
cushion because I
knew, having meditated for over
15 years, more times than not,
after I do some
mindful breathing,
I get anchored
into a space where
it is a kind of
transcendent experience,
and that's going to take me
out of uncomfortable feelings
in the moment.
Or running-- I hit that 5-mile
mark and run 3, 4, 5, 6,
7 more miles, it's going to
give me that runner's high
and get me out of a low, and
not that that's a bad thing,
but when you do it excessively
and as a means for aversion,
it's not necessarily
healthier, definitely
a better option than
picking up a bottle
or putting powder up your
nose or a needle in your arm,
but it's just something to
be aware of because they can
absolutely be addictions too.
And I've injured my
ankle from running
way too much or meditation, I've
never really injured myself,
but, again, I recognize
that you can overdo it.
>>LISA: Well, all right,
so let's talk about this.
You are a realist.
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
>>LISA: And things are
going to happen again.
>>GROSSO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: And bad stuff is
going to happen again.
>>GROSSO: Yeah, yeah.
>>LISA: And it's going
to happen to you,
and it's going to
happen to the world,
be devastating.
>>GROSSO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: What are
you going to do?
>>GROSSO: Personally, my best
defense against a relapse
and going back to that,
what can I do for myself,
is working a strong
program in my life.
They call it a program.
I mean, you can call
it whatever you want,
but just for lack of
better terminology.
>>LISA: I'm talking about,
like, if there is an earthquake
and you lose your house or you
lose your whatever, I mean,
when it gets really bad, is a
program really going to work?
>>GROSSO: If you're working
a strong one, absolutely.
I have gone through hardships
in my life without relapsing.
I have known people who
have lost loved ones, who
have gone through divorce, who
have gone through this or that
and have not picked up.
>>LISA: Death-- yeah.
>>GROSSO: Absolutely--
because they
are working a strong program.
And what I mean by
strong program-- and this
is suitable for someone
who's not necessarily
in recovery from substances,
but just living an integrally
healthy lifestyle.
That can help us.
We don't just do it to
feel good in the moment
or feel good for the day.
We do it so that we are ready
for those things, as well.
But if we're
speaking specifically
to substance-related
issues, they
have what's called a
Swiss cheese model.
And I love this.
Essentially what it's saying
is each layer of Swiss cheese--
so say here is the relapse.
Each layer of Swiss cheese
is part of your program.
So one layer might be
attending meetings,
one layer might be exercise,
one layer might be meditation,
one layer might be yoga, on and
on and on, hiking, whatever.
So each layer, like a piece of
Swiss cheese, has a hole in it.
So things in life can get
through a hole in one layer,
but maybe it'll hit that
second layer and stop it,
or maybe the holes are lined up
so it gets through two layers,
but then the third
layer stops it.
>>LISA: That's good.
>>GROSSO: So yeah.
I mean, that's really, though--
I love that kind of
metaphor for a program.
It's, like, so the more things
you have set up in place,
it puts you farther
away from a relapse,
or if we're not speaking to
addiction and substances,
it puts you farther away from
engaging in any potential
self-defeating behavior, whether
that's engaging in risky sex
or overeating--
>>LISA: Or gaming.
>>GROSSO: Exactly--
anything that is, again,
just a means of numbing out.
And the one caveat
I do want to make
that I think is so
important is that there
are some things in life that
are so painful in the moment.
I wouldn't suggest
leaning into it.
I know we are taught in
the spiritual community
to feel your feelings.
Yes, of course,
feel your feelings.
Lean into it as much as you can.
But if you have just experienced
a tragic loss or an earthquake
or whatever, lean into
it as much as you can.
But if it's too
much in that moment,
turn up music really
loud, watch a comedy.
Yes, it's OK.
Don't pick up a bottle
or do your best not to.
Don't go back to drugs.
But do something
to give yourself
a little space from
that pain in the moment
because it might be too
overwhelming, however--
>>LISA: Knowing your boundaries.
>>GROSSO: --knowing that you're
going to come back to it when
there's a little more time and
space so it's easier to then
work with it, it's easier
to, process it's easier
to, in a healthful manner--
if healthful's even a word--
in a healthier manner,
to own it in your
experience, and that way
you can work with it and
not suppress it and not
make it more of that
unconscious material that
then will manifest in
other ways in our lives.
>>LISA: Do you think
you'll relapse again?
>>GROSSO: I hope I
won't relapse again.
I know it's a reality.
For anyone that has addiction
issues, it's always a reality.
>>LISA: You don't have a hard
stop in your mind saying, no,
that's never going to
happen to me again?
>>GROSSO: I'd be
lying if I said that.
What I do say--
what I can say honestly
is that, in my heart,
I have a desire, a stronger
desire than probably anything
else in my life to never
pick up a substance again.
But knowing the illness,
the disease, the allergy,
whatever we care to
call it, it is a reality
for any addict or alcoholic.
Relapse is always a potential.
It is always a reality.
But as long as I am
living my best life today,
then that means my
day tomorrow, chances
are much better that I
am not going to relapse.
I have known people who have got
it their first time and never
experienced relapse and
lived a healthy life--
>>LISA: Yeah, but you just
said something really key.
>>GROSSO: Go ahead.
Yeah.
>>LISA: You said,
a stronger desire
than anything else in my life.
Are you telling me the truth?
>>GROSSO: Oh yeah, that
is, first and foremost,
what I want.
>>LISA: So if you have-- what
in your life is so important?
Tell me what in your life is
the most important thing to you.
>>GROSSO: First and
foremost, sobriety,
100, because without
that, I don't
have anything else, period.
Anything I put before my
recovery I set up to lose.
So that's why my health, my
well-being, setting boundaries
have to come first and foremost.
>>LISA: So sobriety is
the most important thing--
>>GROSSO: Has to be.
>>LISA: --in your life.
>>GROSSO: Yes.
Without that, I don't
have my girlfriend,
I don't have my family, I am
not able to show up and help
other people because
I am not well.
So without it, I have nothing.
>>LISA: So your
girlfriend and your family
and your helping of others
is also a massive priority
in your life.
>>GROSSO: Oh, huge.
Yeah, but that has
to come second.
And I know that sounds--
>>LISA: Oh, I see.
>>GROSSO: I don't want
to say irrational.
It might not-- people that have
not struggled with addiction
might not understand that.
And that's why I say
that without my sobriety,
without taking that more serious
than anything in my life,
I really set up the possibility
of losing anything else.
>>LISA: But you said to me
you hope you don't relapse.
>>GROSSO: Absolutely.
I hope I don't.
>>LISA: But you said, just
now, the most important thing
in your life is sobriety.
>>GROSSO: Yes.
>>LISA: I don't understand.
>>GROSSO: The most
important thing in my life
has been sobriety.
But even though it's the
most important thing,
it doesn't mean that I don't,
whether it's conscious or not,
stop working a strong
program, starting to pull back
a little bit, getting very
busy, like I said earlier,
not calling my sponsor.
So it's not that I'm
intentionally setting myself up
to relapse again--
>>LISA: Oh, that's the key.
>>GROSSO: Yes.
But things start
to happen where,
again, that voice in my
head says, it's all right
if you miss this or that.
And there will be
circumstances in life
where I might not be able
to hit as many meetings one
week because of my travel
schedule or whatnot.
But as long as I'm
not BSing myself
and that becomes a pattern over
a prolonged period of time,
whereas that's what ends
up leading to a relapse
or becomes the
preliminary relapse.
>>LISA: So you have
this great intention.
And I'm speaking,
also, to people
who have suicidal
tendencies, because sometimes
a relapse or an overdose
is a form of suicide.
>>GROSSO: My sponsor would say,
and I agree, for the alcoholic,
even picking up a drink for a
relapse is a form of suicide.
>>LISA: Let's speak
about that for a sec.
So if you have this big,
huge desire to have sobriety
and if that's your biggest
and most important focus
and there are things that
will pull you off that track
by getting busy and things
that just sneak up or crises
and so forth that
happen in your life,
how do you keep that
your biggest why?
How do you stay there?
Also with people
with suicide, how
do they keep their
child their biggest why
or their reason for
living their biggest why?
And at what point is it
the disease that comes in?
This is not to be answered,
maybe, at this moment.
>>GROSSO: Well, I can
give you a picture of it
because you're speaking
to the disease aspect
or where does that
come into play,
and this is where, for those
who have not experienced it,
it seems like it is
completely insane, which
it is absolutely insane.
>>LISA: That's what I wanted
to unpack from you, that.
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
So let me give you just a very
user friendly, very condensed
overview of what
happens in our brain,
because that's essentially
what triggers all of it.
So once we actually
pick up the substance
and put the substance
in our body, we have--
first of all, I'm
fast forwarding.
So let me tell you this.
We have what's called
a triune brain.
We actually have three
brains in our head.
We have the frontal
cortex, which
is the house of our conscious
thinking, our rational mind,
and that's where we
live most of our days
thinking this is not good
for me, this is good for me,
so on and so forth.
We have our midbrain, which
controls our emotions.
And then we have,
back here in our neck,
it's our limbic-- or not limbic,
excuse me-- our reptilian
brain.
And this is associated with
fight or flight, our survival,
so to speak.
And that's kind of,
also, our caveman brain.
So it's really like it's in that
hunter-gatherer survival mode.
When an addict or alcoholic has
these substances in their body,
they are functioning from
their reptilian brain,
and that's why people,
as insane as it
looks and for those who
have never experienced it,
don't understand.
And I can understand why
they don't understand,
because it is so insane.
But it is-- literally for us,
when we're caught in the grips
of it, that is associated
with survival--
drinking when you are actively
caught in that relapse
or even if you've
never gotten sober.
For any addict
alcoholic, we are then
coming not from our
conscious brain where
right now you and I are having
this conversation that's
rational, but if I
had been drinking,
I would not be in
a rational state.
I would be-- though I might
still have the idea, like, yes,
this is not good for me.
I shouldn't be doing this.
It is far overpowered
by my emotional midbrain
and my reptilian brain.
They are way stronger at that
point than my rational thought.
So I can tell myself, god,
I don't want to do this.
And I can't tell you how
many times I have literally
cried looking at a bottle in
my hand or a line of cocaine
on the table, cried because
I did not want to do it.
But it was so beyond my
control because I was already
caught in it.
I literally did not have
the physical capability
to stop myself.
>>LISA: Got it.
>>GROSSO: And that's
why people end up dying.
They chase it into the grave.
>>LISA: So say you find
somebody in that position
and you catch them in the
grips of it, what do you do?
>>GROSSO: That's the hard part.
And that's where people
say, as you said earlier,
a lot of people let their
loved ones bottom out.
The one inspiring thing is that
a bottom does not necessarily
mean you have to
lose everything.
It can be an emotional bottom.
It can be a wow, I can't believe
I did this, I need to get help.
I know someone that had
an issue with alcohol.
He yelled at a friend and he
kind of lost that friendship
for a while.
That was enough for him
to get sober and really
take it seriously.
So the very difficult
thing is that, really,
the person that is in
the addictive state
needs to want it.
And unfortunately,
a lot of times
it does take them
bottoming out, but, again,
being very clear that the bottom
is different for everyone.
A loved one cannot force the
person that is struggling with
addiction into treatment unless
they have them committed.
But aside from that,
you can love them,
you can try to coerce
them, but really
it's not going to do anything.
Until that person is ready to
get help first and foremost
for themselves, they're not
really going to get better.
They need to want it.
And that's the
disheartening thing.
That's the question I least like
being asked by loved ones, not
in an interview, but when the
family members say, what can I
do?
I'm so scared I'm
going to lose them.
It breaks my heart
because I know
so many parents that
have lost loved ones
so earlier, such a young age.
Parents should not
outlive their children,
especially when it comes
to addiction or depression
and suicide.
And it's just gutting to me.
>>LISA: So when you go
to a concert or an event
and you see people using,
do you say anything?
>>GROSSO: No.
It's not my place.
I mean, if it's a
friend and I see that--
I know that they
know me well enough
to know I wouldn't be imposing
my judgments or moral values
on them.
I might say, hey, have you
ever thought you have an issue,
in a not--
finger pointing never helps.
You have a problem.
That just will shut
someone off automatically.
That doesn't do anything.
So I might say to somebody,
have you ever thought about it?
But more times than not,
friends will approach me
because they know my experience.
And hey, I think I
might have a problem.
What do you think?
And it's like, well, maybe
they do, maybe they don't.
And I'll talk to them about it.
>>LISA: I mean, the
more exposure you have
and the books that you
write and the places
that you go talk, you
provide a space for people
to have this conversation, which
I think is very cool of you.
>>GROSSO: Thanks.
>>LISA: Very cool.
>>GROSSO: Well,
yeah, and that's why
I try to take that approach.
I think it really does allow
for other people to feel--
just it's easier
for them to open up,
and they feel like, all
right, this guy, he gets it.
He's not judging me.
I can talk to him about it.
>>LISA: Yeah.
And you're not on a pulpit
saying, you should not do this.
>>GROSSO: No, not at all.
>>LISA: You're transparent
and you're real.
>>GROSSO: I'm right here.
There is no pedestal.
It's right here with whomever.
always.
>>LISA: And you also
have these moments
of beautiful enlightenment.
I actually have a clip here
of you talking about one
of these moments.
Take a look.
>>GROSSO: It's one of
those experiences that
is just so hard to describe.
But as I'm running, it was--
I guess, I think,
I wrote in the book
that it was an experience of
non-experience is the closest I
can come to describing it.
There was an awareness, but it
was as if everything exploded
and imploded at the same time.
And it was just--
[CHUCKLES] I'm laughing
because as I'm going,
I become aware that there's some
tears streaming down my face,
and that's all I'm aware of.
I can't feel my feet anymore.
I can't feel my legs.
But I'm aware of
these gentle tears.
And the experience lasted
probably only a minute or so
because as soon as I
became aware of that,
I realized how
ridiculously insane
I must have looked
to drivers ongoing.
There's this dude jogging down
the street, tears coming down
his eyes.
But it was just one of those
really beautiful experiences
that really it defies
putting into words,
yet, sure, I was a glutton for
punishment and tried to do it.
But--
>> Is that enlightenment?
Do you think you experienced a
little taste of enlightenment
in that moment?
>>GROSSO: Enlightenment's
a funny word.
But I would say so.
The way-- I think
Sharon Salzberg had
a great take on enlightenment.
And she said, when
you're meditating,
it's not the moments
where you're clear minded.
Well, that is part of it.
But it's those little
moments when you remember
you're lost in thought.
Those are little gaps
of enlightenment.
And I love when she said that.
You're there in the
moment, you come back,
maybe it's for a few seconds,
few minutes, who knows,
but you come back, and
those are little glimpses
of enlightenment.
>> I like this story
because it's really--
not to insult any
joggers in the audience,
but it is a relatively
mundane activity.
>>GROSSO: Absolutely.
>> And you weren't in
the Himalayas and you
weren't at the guru's feet.
You were just jogging.
And all of a sudden,
this expansion happened.
Was there a part of you, after
you came back to yourself,
did you wonder if
you were going crazy?
>>GROSSO: Not in
that one because I've
had these experiences
before, as many
of us in this room
probably have.
For me, I feel it in the heart.
And that, to me, has
always been the true guide.
And I don't mean
to sound cliche.
It's the most honest
way I can describe it.
It's something I feel.
It's a connectedness,
like you said,
of all things at all times.
It is this direct living
experience in the moment,
and it is pure and,
god, beautiful.
Again, words really
fail to describe this,
and I am no Ram Dass
when it comes to trying
to describe these things.
>>LISA: So you obviously have
made peace with your shadow
and you integrate
it into your life.
Can you give us
maybe an exercise
that you teach your students
on how to embrace that shadow?
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
There's a really
super easy practice,
and I've got to give
credit where it's due.
I learned it from the
wonderful JP Sears.
Many of your viewers
probably know him,
the ultra spiritual comedian.
>>LISA: He's great.
>>GROSSO: I met him
several years ago.
We were teaching a workshop
in Mexico together,
our first time teaching
together and we just
hit it off immediately.
Love him to death.
>>LISA: He's hilarious.
>>GROSSO: So funny.
But the funny thing is,
people don't know about him,
he is just one of the most
intelligent, seriously
brilliant, compassionate
people in the world.
So aside from his
humor, he's amazing.
But so he taught this practice
because he is very well trained
in these sorts of topics.
And I've since used
it quite frequently.
I teach it a lot,
and I just love it.
So all that said, the
practice-- so simple.
Any time we are aware
of an emotional response
to something outside
of ourselves,
not just bad or negative,
but good or positive,
so either side, look
at that and go inside.
What is that saying
about ourselves?
Because-- so any time we're
having an emotional response
to something outside-- and not
just a person, but a movie,
a music, the surroundings,
whatever the case may be--
it's always a projection of
something inside of ourselves.
So that's been wonderful for
me, going inside and getting--
because our shadow
is essentially
just the unconscious.
And when we hear
the word "shadow,"
it's often equated with
darkness, bad negativity.
And sure, that's part of it.
But it's the unconscious,
and the unconscious
is not just all bad.
It's the unconscious.
It's whatever it is.
So whenever we have
that experience
of an emotional reaction
to something, flip it.
Instead of making it about
what's outside of us,
what's it actually saying about
inside of us, or us, ourselves?
So for an example, myself,
I would catch myself often
walking in public, didn't
matter where it was,
and seeing a man
with a nice haircut.
And in my mind,
I'd be like, oh, he
looks like a dummy, whatever.
I'd probably say something
not appropriate for the show.
But I have my--
>>LISA: You've done good today.
>>GROSSO: --opinions
and judgements.
>>LISA: Good job.
>>GROSSO: Thank you.
I'm aware.
>>LISA: Family programming.
>>GROSSO: Mindfulness.
But so anyways-- so I'll
be like, whoa, why--
this stranger.
Why are you having this
emotional reaction?
And I'll go inside and I'll
realize, wow, you know what?
It's because you started
balding when you were, like,
18 or 20 years old, and
you can't grow hair,
you shave your head,
or you wear hats a lot.
That's about me.
So it's not really
about that person.
Or if I see someone
wearing a band t-shirt,
I'm like, yeah, yeah.
It's like that is
because I can relate.
I resonate with that.
So it's never really about them.
It's about me.
So those are just
basic examples,
but it's literally anything.
Any time we have a
reaction to anything,
instead of making it about
what's outside of us, what
is that saying about you?
And I'm not saying
judge yourself,
because, no, no, that's
defeating the purpose.
>>LISA: What's the
projection that you're
putting onto the person.
>>GROSSO: Exactly.
And that just gets us so much
more in touch with ourselves,
and it's so simple.
>>LISA: Nice.
>>GROSSO: We can use
it anytime, anywhere,
and it really helps connect
us with our unconscious
and get to know ourselves
at a deeper level.
How simple is that?
>>LISA: Yes, that is something
I will absolutely take away.
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
I hope you do.
>>LISA: Thank you.
>>GROSSO: I love that.
Yeah.
>>LISA: Thank you.
You've met a lot of
great spiritual teachers.
>>GROSSO: I've been fortunate.
>>LISA: How did you Ram Dass?
>>GROSSO: The way
I got connected
with him was I wanted
to do an interview when
one of his more recent books,
"Polishing the Mirror,"
came out.
So I contacted the Love
Serve Remember Foundation.
I wanted to do an interview
with him for that book release.
And Raghu Markus, who
heads that foundation--
he's the executive director--
got back to me and was like,
sure, we can set this up.
He's available for
Skype on this day.
And I remember-- and I don't
want to over romanticize it,
but I literally--
I had a tear come down my
eye because he and Ken Wilber
have been the two current
teachers that have
been so influential in my life.
There have been many others that
I owe a huge debt of gratitude
to, both living and
long since passed.
But contemporary speaking,
they have been two huge ones.
And I've been so fortunate
to meet both of them
and teach alongside, and it's
just a very surreal experience.
So with Ram Dass, we had
that Skype interview,
and then it wasn't that
long after he wrote--
or actually, after that, he
knew I had my first book,
"Indie Spiritualist"
coming out and he
offered to give it an
endorsement without me asking.
And I will never forget
how surreal that was.
And I have it on camera.
I think I put it on
YouTube because I
started to tear up again.
And he said to
me, and that's not
from me, that's
from the big guy,
meaning Maharajji, his guru,
and since my guru, as well.
So that led to Raghu Markus
who was then creating,
shortly thereafter,
a podcast network
called the Be Here Now Network.
He invited me to start
hosting a podcast with them,
which, again, it
was like, really?
Twist my arm, you know?
>>LISA: You're really amazing.
I mean, you really have gotten
into some incredible places
in your life.
I want to just show
this quick clip
with Ram Dass and Chris Grosso.
>>GROSSO: Well, is there
anything, being the old dog
that you are, would
say to the younger
generation of spiritual
seekers that are coming up?
Is there any specific
message or words
of wisdom that you
would impart on them?
>>RAM DASS: This culture is
intrigued with iPhone and such.
And they have to look within.
And it is hard to
look within when
the pizzazz of the culture--
and it's tough to be a
young person in our culture
because they get pulled
outward, because things
are available for them,
available communication, sex,
drugs, unless they
use their awareness
to go into find their
inner guru, inner guru,
they're not going to be
as true spiritual self.
>>LISA: So I like to wrap up
every show with asking you
your biggest why.
And we touched on it
a little bit before,
but I think there's more.
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
I mean, that's--
I love that.
Wish I thought of
that one myself.
My biggest why,
I would say, is--
you're right, we did
start to touch on it.
I think it's because
there is so much--
and the keyword here is
unnecessary pain and suffering
and death in this world.
That is my biggest why.
And the reason I say unnecessary
is because pain and suffering,
to the extent most of us
experience it, a lot of it
is unnecessary.
Death, often, it's unavoidable,
but I believe it's unnecessary.
It comes before its time
in a lot of people's lives.
And that does go back to
the behaviors we engage in.
And my line of work has
led me predominantly
into substance related,
which we've discussed
at length in this conversation.
And thank you for such an
engaging topic and the breadth
of your questions.
But that's what fuels me.
I am so lucky to be alive.
That experience I described
to you with being intubated
was just one of many
times I could have died.
I used to say I
should have died.
But no, I'm still here
today, so I could have died.
So I'm very lucky
to be here, and I
know a lot of people that
are not that fortunate who
have lost their lives.
And I know a lot of
people even right
now that are suffering to an
extent that is not necessary
if they were willing to just
find that strength to reach out
for help, to ask for help, to--
I know it's uncomfortable
to make that decision,
but really look at the
options-- continue in this just
awful experience of being
caught with addiction
or stuck in depression
or cultivate the bravery
to ask for help.
>>LISA: Thank you for that.
Thank you for that.
Your desire for the end of
suffering, needless suffering,
and for your solutions
and offering people
the extension of your
wisdom is a wonderful why.
Thank you so much.
>>GROSSO: Thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: Appreciate it so much.
>>GROSSO: Such a pleasure.
>>LISA: And if you would like
to hear more about Chris Grosso,
please check out my additional
inspiration interviews on Gaia.
I am Lisa Garr, and
until next time,
I invite you to stay aware.
[MUSIC PLAYING]